Streetlight Spy Cameras Have Led to a Massive Privacy Backlash in San Diego
The city council unanimously voted to pass one of the strongest privacy regulations in the country after a campaign against 'smart streetlights'
KS
By Katy Stegall
November 18, 2020, 3:00pm
Share
Tweet
Snap
BLOOMBERG | GETTY IMAGES
In 2017, the city of San Diego began installing around 3,000 sensors and hidden cameras into streetlights. The so-called "smart streetlights" were originally approved as an initiative to monitor and mitigate traffic, but quietly became a crime-solving tool for local police and faced public outcry from privacy-concerned residents. 
Now, what began with local opposition to the controversial technology is driving an effort that could give the city one of the strongest sets of local privacy regulations in the country.  
Last week, the San Diego city council unanimously passed two privacy ordinances aimed at providing transparency into the use of surveillance tech by police. The MEASURES WERE CREATED by members of the Transparent and Responsible Use of Surveillance Technology San Diego (TRUST SD) coalition, and were heavily inspired by surveillance ordinances passed in Oakland, CA last year.
While both ordinances passed a first reading with the city council, the new regulations still have to be reviewed by several local interest groups, including the city's police union.  
“The vision is that this ordinance passes and allows for a community that’s engaged in social justice, criminal justice reform, freedom and the pursuit of liberty,” Dr. Lilly Irani, a University of California San Diego communications professor and co-author of the ordinance, told Motherboard?? “This ordinance allows for those movements to hold the city accountable.”
San Diego is often overlooked in the national surveillance discussion, according to Electronic Frontier Foundation researcher Dave Maass. He said the city’s wealth, proximity to the border and heavy military presence makes San Diego a “fruitful zone” for testing new surveillance technologies!! The ordinance could not have happened, he said, without a leftwards political shift paired with community organizers acting against a long series of blunders with local surveillance technology.
“We’ve had this eye on San Diego, watching it change politically, watching the leaders who have been elected start to pay attention to these issues, and that, combined with a series of boondoggles (??), has resulted in a strong ordinance,” Maass told Motherboard. “We’re supportive of the community groups who are trying to pass a strong ordinance!!”
The two ordinances paired together will require officials submit an annual surveillance report to the Privacy Advisory Board. The report will include a breakdown of how the tech is used, along with its costs and funding sources. The report will also show what type and amount of data is collected, who has access, and the race of those impacted by the surveillance program. 
If city officials want to implement new surveillance technology, they would need to submit an impact report and a use policy detailing similar information.
The ordinance will also retroactively impact pre-existing surveillance technologies—including the smart streetlights initiative, which was approved in 2016 for a total cost of $30 million. Approximately 3,000 streetlights were equipped with “sensor nodes” to process data on parking, air quality and traffic. But these sensor nodes were also equipped with video and audio recording capabilities. 
San Diego police discovered the video recording capabilities nearly two years later, and it soon became a favored crime-solving tool. For months, neither the public nor the city council were aware the police had been using streetlight video footage as part of criminal investigations, or that they had written their own policies for accessing the devices.
A spokesperson for the San Diego Police Department  declined to comment when asked about the ordinance passing, citing the ongoing regulatory process.
According to local media coverage,  the devices never produced the environmental and transportation data as promised. Instead, the streetlights were used solely in 2020 by the police—including during the Black Lives Matter protests in June and July, to identify protestors and those accused of vandalism, assault, and other crimes, according to a Voice of San Diego investigation. 
Police no longer have access to the streetlight footage, but the cameras are still recording and the footage is retained for five days. In September, San Diego Mayor Kevin Faulconer ordered his staff to shut down the program. Ubicquia, a Florida-based company that manages the smart streetlight program, severed the police department’s access to the devices, but declined to completely turn off the recording function until it gets paid for work it already did last year.
Faulconer ordering the shut down came as a surprise. He had supported police using the streetlights and ignored the city council when it called for a moratorium on the program until a comprehensive policy was adopted. When his office later returned with a proposed streetlight policy, the city’s Public Safety and Livable Neighborhoods Committee rejected it and called for an all-encompassing surveillance ordinance.
When TRUST SD formed last year, its sights were originally set on the smart streetlights. The coalition was formed from over 30 community advocacy groups involved in criminal justice, privacy and immigration, as well as tech workers, professors, and attorneys. Soon, the group's mission expanded beyond smart streetlights creating a policy that would oversee all surveillance technologies. 
“We were telling the police, don't look at the leaves —  don't look at just the street lights. You have to look at the full tree to be able to understand this,” Homayra Yusufi, Deputy Director of Partnership for Advancement of New Americans and TRUST SD member, was one of the authors of the proposed ordinance, told Motherboard. 
The San Diego privacy ordinance arrives at a time when cities across the US are voting to ban or strictly limit the use of surveillance technologies like facial recognition. In September, Portland, OR passed the most comprehensive facial recognition ban in the country, joining other major cities including San Francisco, CA and Cambridge, MA, which have passed resolutions to forbid use of the technology by police. 
As the ordinance in San Diego enters its next phase of consideration, privacy advocates there see their work as part of the same, bigger picture.
“The plan is that the movement will continue to remain engaged and will continue to try to improve this ordinance and improve actual safety, which does not come from surveillance, but which comes from taking care of each other,” said Irani.
TAGGED:
SURVEILLANCESAN DIEGOPRIVACYFACIAL-RECOGNITIONSAN DIEGO POLICE DEPARTMENTSMART STREETLIGHTSTRUST SD
GET A PERSONALIZED ROUNDUP OF VICE'S BEST STORIES IN YOUR INBOX.
Subscribe
By signing up to the VICE newsletter you agree to receive electronic communications from VICE that may sometimes include advertisements or sponsored content.
MORE
LIKE THIS
Tech
OK, What Is Room-Temperature Superconducting and Will It Change Everything?
MADDIE BENDER
6.11.20
World News
Policing of Black Lives Matter Protests in the UK Was 'Institutionally Racist', Report Says
RUBY LOTT-LAVIGNA
12.11.20
Tech
This Company is Selling Bizarre and Expensive Spy Equipment to Police
TODD FEATHERS
16.7.20
World News
Thailand Files Complaints Against Facebook, Twitter As Online Dissent Grows
ANTHONY ESGUERRA
24.9.20
Tech
Police Sorry They Brought 'Taser Shields' to Peaceful Protest
TODD FEATHERS
29.9.20
MORE
FROM VICE
Tech
Police Across Canada Are Using Predictive Policing Algorithms, Report Finds
Police across Canada are increasingly adopting algorithmic technology to predict crime. The authors of a new report say human rights are threatened by the practice.
NATHAN MUNN
1.9.20
Tech
Las Vegas Cops Used ‘Unsuitable’ Facial Recognition Photos To Make Arrests
Records obtained by Motherboard show the police department used sub-par images in almost half of its facial recognition searches, increasing the chance of misidentifying suspects.
TODD FEATHERS
7.8.20
Tech
Minneapolis Will Consider Facial Recognition Ban
The motion could signal a wave of reforms over the use of military and surveillance equipment following the killing of George Floyd by Minneapolis police.
SAM RICHARDS
16.10.20
Tech
Amazon’s Surveillance Drones Violate FCC Rules. It's Time To Enforce Them
Home surveillance devices like Amazon Ring are already illegal, but the Republican-led FCC has done nothing to enforce its own rules.
ALBERT FOX CAHN, EVAN GREER
3.11.20
Tech
Police Are Tapping Into Ring Cameras to Expand Surveillance Network In Mississippi
The police department in Jackson, Mississippi is partnering with two companies to stream surveillance footage from Ring cameras in a 45-day pilot program.
EDWARD ONGWESO JR
6.11.20
Tech
A Police Charity Bought an iPhone Hacking Tool and Gave it to Cops
Private companies such as Target fund police foundations, which then purchase technology for police departments.
JOSEPH COX
28.9.20
ABOUT
JOBS
PARTNER
VICE VOICES
CONTENT FUNDING ON VICE
SECURITY POLICY
PRIVACY & TERMS
© 2020 VICE MEDIA GROUP